---
layout: post
title: "Lego Mechanical Computer"
category: computation
tags: [ mechanical computer, LEGO, flip-flop ]
comments: true
---

Not long ago I was part of a discussion about using mechanical things to
demonstrate computing concepts (such as building a [learning Tic-Tac-Toe
game out of
matchboxes](http://boingboing.net/2009/11/02/mechanical-computer.html)).
This got my head spinning on different ways to use mechanical devices to
compute things, whether or not such computation is useful.  I figured I had
enough Legos lying around the house to make something interesting.

I started by thinking of some of the more famous early computers, like
[Pascal's calculator](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pascal's_calculator) and
[Babbage's difference
engine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Difference_engine).  However, I chose
not to implement these.  Perhaps partially because they are mechanically
complex, but also because they are missing some of the fundamental
components we take for granted in computing.  I wanted something that had a
form of memory that could hold a state and then perform an action based on
that state.  I also wanted something that I could "program" by changing the
state transition logic.

I ended up gravitating toward a clever toy called [Digi-Comp
I](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digi-Comp_I), which was manufactured in the
1960's.  The Digi-Comp I is a simple 3 bit machine that is programmed by
adding or removing pegs in its side.  As it happens, a company named
[Minds-On Toys](http://mindsontoys.com) recently started selling [replica
Digi-Comp I kits](http://mindsontoy* s.com/kits.htm?dc1_main.htm).  A
rational person would have just bought and assembled one.  But not me.

I wanted to make my own device to prove to myself that I could.  I borrowed
a lot from the Digi-Comp design and ended up with something that worked
fairly well.  My computer only had two bits instead of three, and I didn't
have a nice clocking mechanism, but it was compact and operated quite
nicely.  Here is a video of it in operation.

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/LfFbX2GgPnE" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

After posting this video, I was inundated with requests for more details on
the internal mechanisms.  (Well, OK, I got a couple of comments.)  Anyway,
this post is me finally getting around to providing more detail.  I have
long ago dismantled the device, and I have no intention of providing
step-by-step instructions in any case.  However, I am giving the high level
concepts that lead me to the final design.  My implementation is far from
perfect anyway, so there is lots of room for improvement.

### Basic Design

There are two main components to the computer.  The first is a memory
structure that holds some number of bits (in my case, two) to represent the
state of the machine.  The second is a control circuit that takes as input
the memory bits and produces as output the signals that change the state of
the memory.  Because there is this feedback loop between memory and control
logic, you need a fairly careful timing mechanism so that the output of the
control holds steady long enough to set the appropriate state of the
memory.  That said, this control mechanism is basically missing from my
computer.  Instead, it relies on the operator (me) performing several
different motions in the correct order to advance to the next state (as you
can see in the video with me flipping several controls).

Of these two components, the control mechanism is fairly straightforward.
There are several ways to build logic gates out of mechanical components
like Legos.  One of the simplest to implement and most compact designs for
gates uses [rod
logic](https://sites.google.com/site/santiagoontanonvillar/Home/lego-projects/lego-rod-logic).
Memory, however, is generally more complicated than simple logic.  It was
the creation of this memory that dominates most of this computer's design.

### The Flip-Flop

Memory can be implemented using a special kind of digital circuit known as
a [flip-flop](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flip-flop_(electronics)).  The
flip-flop is designed to change its state when it receives a signal and
then continue to hold that state after the signal is released.

<figure style="float:right; width:300px;">
  <img src="/images/mechanical-computer/animated-s-r-flip-flop.gif"
       alt="SR Flip-Flop"
       width="300"
       height="219">
  <figcaption>
    An SR flop-flop from NOR gates.  Image courtesy of Napalm Llama.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

A flip-flop can be constructed out of standard gates (at least, the
electronic variety) using a feedback loop that makes a circular loop from
the output of gates back to the input of the same gate.  If constructed
carefully, this feedback can hold the output state of the gate.  This image
here shows an animation of a set/reset (SR) flip-flop.  When the set (S)
signal is raised, the output goes positive and stays that way even after S
is lowered again.  When the reset (R) is raised, the output goes negative
and stays there.

This circuit is straightforward to build out of electronic logic circuits,
but problematic when the gates are mechanical.  The real challenge is in
designing this feedback loop in a way that does not lock up the mechanism.
Added to this challenge is the fact that the overall mechanical computer
introduces a _second_ feedback loop (memory to control back to memory)
that must also be managed.

Fortunately, there is a simple way around all these problems.  The approach
bypasses all these problems by building the flip-flop without any gates at
all.  A simple device is shown below.

<figure>
  <img src="/images/mechanical-computer/simple-flip-flop-0.jpg"
       alt="Mechanical flip-flop 0"
       width="100%">
  <img src="/images/mechanical-computer/simple-flip-flop-1.jpg"
       alt="Mechanical flip-flop 1"
       width="100%">
  <figcaption>
    A mechanical SR flip-flop with output of 0 (top) and 1 (bottom).
  </figcaption>
</figure>

That's right.  The mechanical flip-flop is... a stick.  I've added some
labels to define the SR implementation and a post to clearly mark the
position, but ultimately the flip-flop is just a stick you push back and
forth.  Unlike electrons, sticks (and really most physical things) tend to
stay put, so you can represent state by where they are sitting.

Of course, to use this stick flip-flop in a larger circuit we'll need to
place it in a holder.  And to support the circuit from control back to
flip-flop, we need a gating mechanism that hold the set or reset signal
until the rest of the control logic gets out of the way (literally) and
then activate it with a clock signal.  Both of these are demonstrated
below.

<figure>
  <img src="/images/mechanical-computer/gated-flip-flop.jpg"
       alt="Gated mechanical flip-flop."
       width="100%">
  <figcaption>
    The &ldquo;stick&rdquo; flip-flop placed in a holder with added latched
    and gated inputs.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

The set and reset signals are now bars that block a second pair of "clock"
bars from moving the stick.  As long as both set and reset are blocking,
the flip-flop state will remain in place.  Set or reset is activated by
moving that bar out of the way, and the next time you push the clock the
state of the flip-flop will change.

The actual flip-flops implemented in my Lego mechanical computer are a bit
different.  They are designed to activate the set or reset by pushing in
rather than pulling out, but the basic idea is the same.

### Control Circuit

Notice in the image above that this design for a mechanical flip flop
places the set and reset bars perpendicular to the stick representing the
flip flop state.  As it happens, this is an ideal position for the
set/reset signals to be in.

The mechanical computer has yet another bar for each set and reset that
slides laterally in and out to activate the set or reset.  Because of the
orientation of the set and reset bars, it is simple to add posts to the
flip flop state stick that will block the set or reset from being
activated.  These posts are moved in and out of the way based on the
position of the stick (i.e. the state of the flip flop).  The operation of
this mechanism is clearly shown in the video.

Multiple flip flop sticks can be stacked to provide posts for each bit of
state.  Thus, the control for each set and reset is an AND operation for
the state of each bit.  For an arbitrary number of bits, this logic is not
powerful enough to capture every possible state change, but for just two
bits (the number in my computer), it just so happens to be enough to
capture all possible state changes.

The nice thing about this control logic is that it is very compact giving
the overall mechanical computer a surprisingly small form factor.  Another
convenient feature is that the computer can be reprogrammed with minimal
reconstruction.  It is just a matter of moving the posts in the flip flop
sticks, which are accessible from the front of the device.

### The Final Word

The point of this device, if there is one, is to separate out the concept
and theory of computation from the digital electronic devices we most
commonly associate with computing.  There is nothing inherently electronic
about computers.  It just so happens that it is much easier to design
computing devices using components driven from electricity.  At least, that
is the state of the known inventions so far.


### Links

Here is a collection of links to other projects concerning famous
mechanical computers or other Lego computer projects (most far more
impressive than mine).

* [Replicas of the Babbage Difference Engine](http://www.computerhistory.org/babbage)
* [The Digi-Comp I, available for sale](http://mindsontoys.com/kits.htm?dc1_main.htm)
* [Lego replicas of the Babbage Difference Engine and Antikythera Mechanism by Andrew Carol](http://acarol.woz.org)
* [An entirely mechanical implementation of a Turing Machine at the Claude Bernard University (Lyon)](http://rubens.ens-lyon.fr/en)
* [A functional replica of the Digi-Comp I using Legos](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UulJaoDAflw)
