---
layout: post
title: "The Three Birthday Problem"
category: probability
tags: [ probability, birthday ]
comments: true
---

<script type="text/javascript"
  src="http://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

A while ago one of my aunts posted that 3 of her Facebook friends were
having a birthday that day. It seems like a remarkable coincidence, but is
it? This observation is reminiscent of a well known problem in probability
that yields a surprising result.

### The Conventional 2 Birthday Problem

The conventional probability theory known as the birthday problem or
birthday paradox concerns the probability that, given a group of _N_
people, at least two such people in the group have the same birthday. As it
turns out, the probability is probably higher than you think.

What makes this problem non-intuitive is that we are not measuring whether
_you_ have the same birthday as someone else but whether _any_ two people
have the same birthday. So we don't care so much about how many people are
in the group but how many pairs of people are in the group, and that number
grows much faster. In a cozy group of 5 people there are only 10 pairs, but
in a classroom of 25 students there are 300 pairs.

OK, back to the question: How likely is it that a pair of people in a group
have the same birthday? It should be the probability that two people have
the same birthday (about 1/365, assuming all birthdays are equally likely
and ignoring leap days) times the number of pairs in that group, right?
Well, no. It's not that easy. (Nothing in stupid probability ever is.) You
also have to take into account the possibility that more than one pair has
the same birthday, and that's where things get complicated.

I use a trick to solve this problem. Rather than compute the probability
that two people have the same birthday, compute the probability that _no
one_ has the same birthday as anyone else. To compute that, I consider the
people one at a time (in an arbitrary but fixed order). The first person
has no one to pair with, so the probability of no same birthday is 1
(100%). The second person will not match with the first person with
probability 364/365. The third person will not match with the first two
with probability 363/356. And so on. Just multiply those numbers up and
take the inverse. There is your solution.

<div>
\[
\mathrm{P}(\textrm{shared b-day for } N) = 
1 - \frac{356 \cdot 364 \cdot 363 \cdot 362 \cdots (366 - N)}{365^{N}}
\]
</div>

<figure style="float:right; width:300px;">
  <a href="/images/plot-2-birthday.png">
    <img src="/images/plot-2-birthday.png"
         alt="Duplicate birthday probabilities"
         width="300"
         height="180">
  </a>
  <figcaption>
    Probability of duplicate birthdays for groups of increasing size.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

The plot at right shows the probability that at least one pair in a group
has the same birthday for increasing group sizes. Surprisingly with a group
of people as small as 23, it is even money whether some pair will have the
same birthday. At a group of size 57, there is a 99% chance for a birthday
collision! My probability teacher once suggested that this is an amusing
property to try out at parties. (Of course, I'm guessing that means my math
teacher wasn't invited to many parties.)

### The 3 Birthday Problem

Interesting (or, at least, I find it interesting), but so far we haven't
addressed my aunt's situation where _3_ people have the same birthday. The
conventional birthday problem tells us nothing about the 3 birthday
problem although it leads me to suspect the probability is greater than
what intuition would tell you.

So what is the probability for, given a group of people, that three have
the same birthday. The answer is... I don't know. The trick I used for a
pair of people doesn't work for 3, and the counting just gets too
complicated for my little brain.

Fortunately, I have another trick up my sleeve. Rather than figure out the
exact solution, I can write a simulator program to estimate the
probability. Here's how it works. The simulator sets up an empty (virtual)
room. It then lets in people one at a time. Each person coming in has a
random birthday. The simulation continues doing this until someone comes in
with a birthday that completes a triple.

That, of course, does not give us any probabilities. If we run the
simulation again, we will (probably) get a different answer. But, if we run
the simulation enough times, we can estimate the probabilities as the
percentage of times the simulated group had 3 people with the same
birthday. There is a very rigorous branch of computational science to
determine the number of samples needed and the uncertainty remaining. But
screw all that; I just ran the simulation for an excessive 100,000
times. For those who would like to run the simulator yourself, I have [the
code posted here](https://gist.github.com/kmorel/6567225).

<figure style="float:right; width:300px;">
  <a href="/images/plot-3-birthday.png">
    <img src="/images/plot-3-birthday.png"
         alt="Triple duplicate birthday probabilities"
         width="300"
         height="180">
  </a>
  <figcaption>
    Probability of having 3 duplicate birthdays for groups of increasing size.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

The plot at right shows the probability that at least one set of three
people in a group has the same birthday for increasing group sizes. (The
plot for groups of size 2 is also shown.) We see that the 3 birthday
problem does indeed behave very similarly to the 2 birthday problem, but
with expected shifted probabilities. With only 87 people in the group, the
probability of having 3 simultaneous birthdays is 50%. Having 87 "friends"
is pretty common for even casual Facebook users. Heck, I have more than 100
friends despite being unpopular and generally annoying. I see that my aunt
now has about 150 Facebook friends. That makes having 3 friends with the
same birthday pretty darn likely at over 96% probability.

### Even More Coincident Birthdays

But why stop there? How likely is it to have 4 birthdays the same? Or 5? Or
6? The nice thing about using the simulator is that it is easy to expand to
larger counts (you just have to wait longer). If you took a look at my
[simulator code](https://gist.github.com/kmorel/6567225), you may have
already noticed that it measures up to 6 simultaneous birthdays.

<figure style="float:right; width:300px;">
  <a href="/images/plot-6-birthday.png">
    <img src="/images/plot-6-birthday.png"
         alt="Sextuple duplicate birthday probabilities"
         width="300"
         height="180">
  </a>
  <figcaption>
    Probability of having up to 6 duplicate birthdays for groups of
    increasing size.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Here is a report of how likely it is to have up to six simultaneous
birthdays. (The full data for this plot are [posted
here](https://gist.github.com/kmorel/6567773).) As we increase the number
of simultaneous birthdays, we need a larger group size to make it
probable. (No surprise there.) Also note that the behaviors of these curves
are similar. They all start off unlikely and then the curve dramatically
bends upward.

<div style="clear:both"></div>

<figure style="float:right; width:300px;">
  <a href="/images/plot-birthday-trend.png">
    <img src="/images/plot-birthday-trend.png"
         alt="Birthday problem trend"
         width="300"
         height="180">
  </a>
  <figcaption>
    Trend of the likelihood of having <emph>N</emph> people with the same
    birthday.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

This next plot demonstrates the trend of the _N_ birthday problem. The plot
shows the size of the group necessary to hit a particular probability for
each version of the birthday problem. At the top of the filled lines is the
group size for a 99% probability, which I take for almost certainty.

What I find most interesting about this plot is the grouping of the middle
quartiles, between 25% and 75%. Although this represents half of the
probability space, these are bunched in a small group for every birthday
problem. This is indicative of the sharp upward swing in the S shape of the
curves.

### Final Remarks

When I started speculating about the 3 birthday problem, I really had never
considered anything more than the 2 birthday problem. I could not find any
other references to the birthday problem with any more than pairs of
identical birthdays although perhaps I just have bad Google-fu. It was
gratifying to find that the solution matched my general expectation, which
is so seldom the case in probability.

Anyone interested in probability or this problem should check out
Wikipedia's [article on the birthday
problem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birthday_problem). It contains a much
deeper analysis than I give here.

Finally, it is a little ungratifying that I was unable to come up with a
closed solution for the 3 birthday problem. If you find one, let me know.
