---
layout: post
title: "LEGO Advent Calendar"
category: games
tags: [ LEGO, holiday, Christmas ]
---

<img src="/images/lego-advent-calendar/calendar.jpg"
     alt="Advent Calendar"
	 width="260px"
	 height="340px"
	 style="float:right; padding:10px;"/>

Years ago, we bought an advent calendar for our kids. It is a wooden
structure comprising 24 hinged boxes. Some time in November, my wife would
fill the boxes with little trinkets. Then, each day in December leading up
to Christmas the kids could open a box and get a little surprise.

Years have passed, and the kids have outgrown the little stamps and
stickers that typically populated the calendar. But the kids still love
doing it. Which begs the question, what do we put in it.

So I had a thought. Rather than try to come up with 24 tiny presents, what
if the items came together to form one large, and ultimately more fun, toy?

Doing that isn't hard. A construction toy does just this. A construction
set, such as LEGO, comes in little pieces that, in several steps, come
together to build a single item. So just break up the steps into 24 parts,
put the instruction parts with the associated pieces in each box, and let
the fun ensue.

That's probably enough instruction you need. That said, here is some added
information that might be helpful.

## Picking a Set

The first step, of course, is actually getting a construction toy. Just
about any set will do. It just needs to have at least 24 steps to build
something.

LEGO and other brands do sell pre-made advent calendar kits, and that is
certainly the easiest way to go. However, all the kits I have seen are 24
tiny independent models, which is kind of missing the point of building
something larger.

I try to go for something that is unlikely to be very recognizable until
near the end. Also, our advent calendar has pretty small boxes, so I try to
find a kit that looks like it comprises mostly small pieces.

I'm sure any brand of kit will do. I find the LEGO brand kits have a couple
of useful features for the project, which I'll mention later.

## Dividing the Instructions

The next step is taking the instructions and splitting them into 24 parts.
The easiest way to do that is to take the instruction booklet and divide
the pages up somewhat evenly.

One particularly nice thing about LEGO sets is that [LEGO provides online
build instructions] for any kit. You can download a PDF file for any
instruction kit. Other brands might provide something similar. With the
online PDF file, you can use an editor to split the pages into separate
files.

With the instructions split up into 24 files, I post the files onto a cloud
file service. Any file service will work as long as you can publicly share
the files. There are plenty of free alternatives (such as [Google Drive],
[OneDrive], [Dropbox], and many others).

<img src="/images/lego-advent-calendar/qr-codes.jpg"
     alt="QR Codes"
	 width="260px"
	 height="294px"
	 style="float:right; padding:10px;"/>

From there I use a QR code generator to convert the shared links to the
files I posted to a QR code. (Once again, there are lots of free, online QR
code generator services. I would pick one that allows you to copy/paste
directly from the web page.) From there I open up a word processor and make
a table of QR codes, labeled for each day.

Or alternately, you could just cut up the instruction booklet and just
package up the pages directly.

## Divvying up the Parts

<img src="/images/lego-advent-calendar/package.jpg"
     alt="Package"
	 width="235px"
	 height="216px"
	 style="float:left; padding:10px;"/>

Now that the instructions are split up, it's time to fill up the advent
calendar boxes. For each day, find the parts associated with those steps,
and package them together with the QR code for the instructions (or the
actual instruction pages if that's the way you go).

This is the time consuming part. Here is another place where LEGO has some
features to make it easier. First, modern LEGO instructions have, at the
beginning of each step, a list of parts for that step. That makes it easier
to correctly package the parts. Second, the moderately large LEGO sets
divide the parts into packages that are opened sequentially. This makes it
easier to find the parts for each step.

<img src="/images/lego-advent-calendar/fill-box.jpg"
     alt="Filling the Box"
	 width="260px"
	 height="340px"
	 style="float:right; padding:10px;"/>

From there, place each bundle in the associated box of the advent calendar.
Or, if you don't have a calendar, put them in labeled boxes or bags or
presents. It's really all about a surprise each day.


[LEGO provides online build instructions]: https://www.lego.com/en-us/service/buildinginstructions/
[Google Drive]: http://drive.google.com/
[OneDrive]: https://onedrive.live.com/
[Dropbox]: https://www.dropbox.com/
